# SIMD Everywhere

SIMDe is an attempt to implement SIMD intrinsics on hardware which
doesn't natively support them, such as calling SSE functions on ARM.

The initial focus is on writing complete portable implementations.
Once that's complete we will start focusing on optimizations, such as
implementing one set of functions with another.

For an example of a project using SIMDe, see
[LZSSE-SIMDe](https://github.com/nemequ/LZSSE-SIMDe).

There are currently full implementations of the following instruction
sets:

 * MMX
 * SSE

Work is underway to support various versions of SSE.  For detailed
progress information, see the
[instruction-set-support](https://github.com/nemequ/simde/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Ainstruction-set-support+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
label in the issue tracker.  If you'd like to be notified when an
instruction set is available you may subscribe to the relevant issue.

[![Travis](https://api.travis-ci.org/nemequ/simde.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/nemequ/simde) [![AppVeyor](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/1f3wp712w1ium5vi/branch/master?svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/quixdb/simde/branch/master) [![Codecov](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/nemequ/simde.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/nemequ/simde)

## Want to help?

There are a *lot* of instructions to get through, so any help would be
greatly appreciated!  It's pretty straightforward work, and a great
way to learn about the instructions.

There are three places you'll want to modify in order to implement a
new function:

 * ${isax}.h — this is where the implementations live
 * test/test-${isax}.c — tests comparing the portable implementation
   with the expected result.
 * test/test-cmp-${isax}.c — tests comparing the portable
   implementation with the "native" version, using random data for
   inputs.

Hopefully it's clear what to do by using other functions in those
files as a template, but if you have trouble please feel free to
contact us; we're happy to help!

If you're not sure that your implementation will be fast enough, don't
worry!  Right now we just want to get correct implementations in
place, we can worry about optimizing later.

## Usage

Each instruction set has a separate file; `mmx.h` for MMX, `sse.h` for
SSE, `sse2.h` for SSE2, and so on.  Just include the header for
whichever instruction sets you want.  If your compiler has enabled the
relevant instruction set SIMDe will use the native intrinsics,
otherwise a portable fallback will be used.

Symbols are prefixed with `simde_`.  For example, the MMX
`_mm_add_pi8` intrinsic becomes `simde_mm_add_pi8`, and `__m64`
becomes `simde__m64`.

Since SIMDe is meant to be portable, many functions which assume types
are of a specific size have been altered to use fixed-width types
instead.  For example, Intel's APIs assume `int` is 32 bits, so
`simde_mm_set_pi32`'s arguments are `int32_t` instead of `int`.  On
platforms where the native API's assumptions hold (*i.e.*, if `int`
really is 32-bits) SIMDe's types should be compatible, so existing
code needn't be changed unless you're porting to a new platform.

For best performance, you should enable OpenMP 4 SIMD support by
defining `SIMDE_ENABLE_OPENMP` before including any SIMDe headers, and
enabling OpenMP support in your compiler.  GCC and ICC both support a
flag to enable only OpenMP SIMD support instead of full OpenMP (the
SIMD support doesn't require the OpenMP run-time library); for GCC the
flag is `-fopenmp-simd`, for ICC `-openmp-simd`.  SIMDe also supports
using [Cilk Plus](https://www.cilkplus.org/), [GCC loop-specific
pragmas](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Loop-Specific-Pragmas.html),
or [clang pragma loop hint
directives](http://llvm.org/docs/Vectorizers.html#pragma-loop-hint-directives),
though these are not as well tested.

## Related Projects

 * The "builtins" module in
   [portable-snippets](https://github.com/nemequ/portable-snippets)
   does much the same thing, but for compiler-specific intrinsics
   (think `__builtin_clz` and `_BitScanForward`), **not** SIMD
   intrinsics.
 * Intel offers an emulator, the [Intel® Software Development
   Emulator](https://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/intel-software-development-emulator/)
   which can be used to develop software which uses Intel intrinsics
   without having to own hardware which supports them, though AFAIK it
   doesn't help for deployment.
 * I'm not aware of anyone else trying to create portable
   implementations of an instruction set, but there are a few projects
   trying to implement one set with another:
   * [ARM_NEON_2_x86_SSE](https://github.com/intel/ARM_NEON_2_x86_SSE)
     — implementing NEON using SSE, quite extensive
   * [sse2neon](https://github.com/jratcliff63367/sse2neon) —
     implementing SSE using NEON
   * [veclib](https://github.com/IvantheDugtrio/veclib) — implementing
     SSE2 using AltiVec/VMX, using a non-free IBM library called
     [powerveclib](https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/groups/community/powerveclib/)
   * [SSE-to-NEON](https://github.com/otim/SSE-to-NEON) — implementing
     SSE with NEON.  Non-free.
 * [arm-neon-tests](https://github.com/christophe-lyon/arm-neon-tests)
   contains tests te verify NEON implementations.

If you know of any other related projects, please [let us
know](https://github.com/nemequ/simde/issues/new)!

## Caveats

Sometime features can't be emulated.  If SIMDe is operating in native
mode the functions will work as expected, but if there is no native
support the following caveats apply:

### SSE

 * `simde_MM_SET_ROUNDING_MODE()` will use `fesetround()`, altering
   the global rounding mode.
 * `simde_mm_getcsr` and `simde_mm_setcsr` only implement bits 13 and
   14 (rounding mode).

## Platform Support

SIMDe requires C99.

Every commit is tested with several different versions of GCC, clang,
and PGI via [Travis CI](https://travis-ci.org/nemequ/simde) on Linux.
Microsoft Visual C++ is tested on Windows using
[AppVeyor](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/quixdb/simde).  Intel C/C++
Compiler is also tested sporadically (mostly because their
optimization reports are excellent).

I'm generally willing to accept patches to add support for other
compilers, as long as they're not too disruptive, *especially* if we
can get CI support going.  Travis and AppVeyor are great, but feel
free to use whatever works.

## License

To the extent possible under law, the authors have waived all
copyright and related or neighboring rights to this code.  For
details, see the Creative Commons Zero 1.0 Universal license at
https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/
